Third Grade Common Core Math Standards
With forty-one states adopting the common core curriculum, there is a very good chance your child is following the common core state standards. Below we will provide you a detailed insight into the third-grade common core math standards and with valuable resources to help your child succeed in school and at home. 

What is Common Core?

This is one of the most frequent questions we get asked by parents and across the board, there is confusion when it comes to the words "common core". Very simply, Common Core is a comprehensive list of standards that students need to know for English Language Arts (ELA) and math from kindergarten to 12th grade. 

Who created these common core standards?

Highly qualified teachers and experts all over the United States helped create the framework of what we know today as the common core standards. The main objective of creating these common core standards is so students can develop their critical-thinking skills, analytical skills, and problem-solving skills.  

​

Grade 3 Common Core Math Standards Overview
There are five main topics covered in the third-grade common core math standards.

Operations & Algebraic Thinking
Measurement & Data
Numbers & Operations in Base Ten
Geometry
Numbers & Operations - Fractions
The chart below provides a comprehensive review of the learning standards for third grade.  

The chart below provides a comprehensive review of the learning standards for second grade.  

Operations & Algebraic Thinking
Represent and solve problems involving multiplication and division.
3.OA.A.1

Interpret products of whole numbers, e.g., interpret 5 × 7 as the total number of objects in 5 groups of 7 objects each. 

3.OA.A.2

Interpret whole-number quotients of whole numbers, e.g., interpret 56 ÷ 8 as the number of objects in each share when 56 objects are partitioned equally into 8 shares, or as a number of shares when 56 objects are partitioned into equal shares of 8 objects each.

3.OA.A.3

Use multiplication and division within 100 to solve word problems in situations involving equal groups, arrays, and measurement quantities, e.g., by using drawings and equations with a symbol for the unknown number to represent the problem.1

3.OA.A.4

Determine the unknown whole number in a multiplication or division equation relating three whole numbers.

Understand properties of multiplication and the relationship between multiplication and division.
3.OA.B.5

Apply properties of operations as strategies to multiply and divide.

3.OA.B.6

Understand division as an unknown-factor problem. 

Multiply and divide within 100.
3.OA.C.7

Fluently multiply and divide within 100, using strategies such as the relationship between multiplication and division (e.g., knowing that 8 × 5 = 40, one knows 40 ÷ 5 = 8) or properties of operations. By the end of Grade 3, know from memory all products of two one-digit numbers.

Solve problems involving the four operations, and identify and explain patterns in arithmetic.
3.OA.D.8

Solve two-step word problems using the four operations. Represent these problems using equations with a letter standing for the unknown quantity. Assess the reasonableness of answers using mental computation and estimation strategies including rounding.

3.OA.D.9

Identify arithmetic patterns (including patterns in the addition table or multiplication table), and explain them using properties of operations.

Numbers &
Operation in Base Ten
Use place value understanding and properties of operations to perform multi-digit arithmetic.
3.NBT.A.1

Use place value understanding to round whole numbers to the nearest 10 or 100.

3.NBT.A.2

Fluently add and subtract within 1000 using strategies and algorithms based on place value, properties of operations, and/or the relationship between addition and subtraction.

3.NBT.A.3

Multiply one-digit whole numbers by multiples of 10 in the range 10-90 (e.g., 9 × 80, 5 × 60) using strategies based on place value and properties of operations.

Numbers &
Operation - Fractions 
Develop understanding of fractions as numbers.
3.NF.A.1

Understand a fraction 1/b as the quantity formed by 1 part when a whole is partitioned into b equal parts; understand a fraction a/b as the quantity formed by a parts of size 1/b.

3.NF.A.2

Understand a fraction as a number on the number line; represent fractions on a number line diagram.

3.NF.A.3

Explain equivalence of fractions in special cases, and compare fractions by reasoning about their size.

Measurement & Data
Solve problems involving measurement and estimation.
3.MD.A.1

Tell and write time to the nearest minute and measure time intervals in minutes. Solve word problems involving addition and subtraction of time intervals in minutes, e.g., by representing the problem on a number line diagram.

3.MD.A.2

Measure and estimate liquid volumes and masses of objects using standard units of grams (g), kilograms (kg), and liters (l). Add, subtract, multiply, or divide to solve one-step word problems involving masses or volumes that are given in the same units, e.g., by using drawings (such as a beaker with a measurement scale) to represent the problem.

Relate addition and subtraction to length.
3.MD.B.3

Draw a scaled picture graph and a scaled bar graph to represent a data set with several categories. Solve one- and two-step "how many more" and "how many less" problems using the information presented in scaled bar graphs.

3.MD.B.4

Generate measurement data by measuring lengths using rulers marked with halves and fourths of an inch. Show the data by making a line plot, where the horizontal scale is marked off in appropriate units— whole numbers, halves, or quarters.

Geometric measurement: understand concepts of area and relate area to multiplication and to addition.
3.MD.C.5

Recognize area as an attribute of plane figures and understand concepts of area measurement.

3.MD.C.6

Measure areas by counting unit squares (square cm, square m, square in, square ft, and improvised units).

3.MD.C.7

Relate area to the operations of multiplication and addition.

Geometric measurement: recognize perimeter.
3.MD.D.8

Solve real-world and mathematical problems involving perimeters of polygons, including finding the perimeter given the side lengths, finding an unknown side length, and exhibiting rectangles with the same perimeter and different areas or with the same area and different perimeters.

Geometry
Reason with shapes and their attributes.
3.G.A.1

Understand that shapes in different categories (e.g., rhombuses, rectangles, and others) may share attributes (e.g., having four sides), and that the shared attributes can define a larger category (e.g., quadrilaterals). Recognize rhombuses, rectangles, and squares as examples of quadrilaterals, and draw examples of quadrilaterals that do not belong to any of these subcategories.

3.G.A.2

Partition shapes into parts with equal areas. Express the area of each part as a unit fraction of the whole.